# Database Models
## DBMS Classification
Classify DBMS by conceptual data model used, and this model affects all other components in system. 

Examples include hierarchical(oldest), network, relational, object orientated and object relational, graph(has nodes,edges,properties), noSql etc.

### Relational Database
* relations(two-dimensional tables)
* tuples(rows represent collection of related values, i.e. an entity)
* attributes(columns contain values of same data type).

**Domain**: the data type describing the values that can appear in each column is represented by a domain of possible values.

Database represented as collection of *mathematical relations*.

**Formal Definition**: A relational schema R denoted by R(A1,A2,...,An) is made up of: 
* relation name R
* List of attributes A1...An
* Each attribute Ai is the name of the role played by domain Di in the relation R
* the degree of a schema, is equal to number of attributes, n

Remember a relation can be seen as a set of tuples, and they are unordered. Each tuple is an ordered list of n values.

#### Characteristics of Relations
* Values in tuples
  * Each value in a tuple is atomic (no composite or multivalued attributes)
  * Multivalued attributes must be represented by seperate relations
  * composite attributes represented by single component attributues in basic relational model

#### Primary Key
An attribute that uniquely identifies the tuples of a relation.
Not all relations have one, some relations have multiple attributes acting as a combined priamry key, and null keys are not permitted in primary keys.

#### Foreign Key 
A foreign key formally specifies a referential integrity constraints between 2 relations