# Relational Algebra
A data model must include a set of operations to manipulate the database and relational algebra is the basic set of operations for the relational model.

## Relational Algebra Operations
Relational algebra consists of a set of operations that fall into set operations and relational operations.
 * Set Operations: UNION,INTERSECTION,SET DIFFERENCE
 * Relation DB Operations: 
   * Unary Operations: SELECT and PROJECT
   * Binary Operations: JOIN
## Relational Operations
### Selection
Formal Notation: σ(select condition)(R)

Identify set of tuples in R that satisy select condition, and returns a new relation of those tuples with same attributes as R. Essentially filter a relation or partition it horizontally.

#### Select Condition
select condition: attribute name:comparison operator:constant value
* attribute name: name of attribute in R
* comparison operator: = < ≤ > ≥ ≠	
  * if unorderd domain can only use = or not	
* constant value: a value from attribute domain

Select conditions can be joined by boolean AND, OR and NOT. You can also use another attribute instead of a constant value.

Degree of relation is the number of attributes in relation and degree of select operator is same as relation degree.

|σ<sub>c</sub>(R)| ≤ |R| The fraction of tuples in a relation R selected by a condition c is known as the *selectivity* of that condition.

**Note**: the select operation is commutative
– σ <sub>(condition 1)</sub>(σ<sub>(condition 2)</sub>(R))

#### Selection in SQL
SELECT * from R WHERE attribute=value AND attribute2>value2;

### Projection
This selects certain attributes from table, i.e. a vertical partition of the table

**Formal Notation**:  π<sub>attribute list</sub>(R)

The resulting relation has only attributes specified in attribute list and hence degree of resulting relation is equal to number of attributes in that list.

#### Duplication Elimination
* Project op can speciy no key attributes
* Therefore duplicate tuples can occur but result of projection must be valid relation and can only have distinct tuples
* The project operation remives duplicate tuples and returns a valid relation

#### Projection in SQL
SELECT also covers projection.

Example: SELECT name,salary from EMPLOYEE;
However SQL doesn't cover duplicate elimination so introduced DISTINCT key word

SELECT DISTINCT name, salary from EMPLOYEE;

### Combining Select and project
* Nesting Operation: π Fname, Lname, Salary(σ<sub>(Dno=4 AND Salary>25000)</sub>(EMPLOYEE))
* Intermediate Relations:EMPS ←σ <sub>(Dno=4 AND Salary>25000)</sub>(EMPLOYEE)
RESULT ← π <sub> Fname, Lname, Salary </sub> (EMPS)

## Set Operations
Union, intersection, set difference are binary operations.
The 2 relations in the operation must be "union compatible" (same degree, same domain for each corresponding pair of attributes)

### Union
R∪S 
Resulting relation has all tuples of R and S, and duplicate tuples are discarded. This is a commutative operation.
### Intersection
R∩S
Resulting relation has all tuples that are in R AND S. This is a commutative operation.

Both union and intersection can be treated as n-ary operations, as they are associative.

R∪(S∪T) = (R∪S)∪T

### Difference
R -S
Resulting relation has all tuples that are in R but are not in S. This is not commutative.

### Set operators in SQL
* UNION
* INTERSECT
* EXCEPT 

There are also multi-set operators that do not elimiate duplicates.
* UNION ALL
* INTERSECT ALL
* EXCEPT ALL


## Join
R [><]<sub> join condition</sub>S

Combines related tuples from 2 relations into a single tuple