# Referential Transparency
A language is referentially transparent if replacing an expression by another equal expression does not change meaning/value of program as a whole.

Referentially Transparent:

* A function whose output depends only on its inputs.
* Expressions built from standard arithmetic operators.
* None of the above have any “side-effects”.
  
Referentially Opaque:

* A function whose value depends on some global variable or state-component.
* A procedure/function that modifies global state.
* The assignment statement.
* A function that performs I/O,
it depends on the global state of “real world”, and modifies it.
* Most of the above are examples of “side-effects”

## Why should I care?

* Reasoning about program behaviour is easier“substituting equals for equals”
* Code optimization is much simpler
* Scope for code optimization is much greater
* A programming language where every construct is referentially transparent, w.r.t. to the “obvious” semantics, is called “pure”
  * Haskell (and Clean) are pure functional languages
  * ML, Scheme, LISP are generally considered impure functionallanguages (they have explicit assignment and I/O side-effects),but this is w.r.t. a simple functional semantics for suchlanguages.


## What Referential Transparency isn't.

Referential Transparency does not mean:
  * the language is functional
  * the language has no side-effects


Referential Transparency is a property relating a language and its semantics
  * most languages can be given a semantics that makes them referentially transparent.
  * The issue is one of degree: such a semantics may be very complex.
  * Pure functional languages are referentially transparent w.r.t. a relatively simple and obvious semantics.
  * An imperative language with a full semantics is also
    referentially transparent


# Copying and Single Threadedness

With pure functional languages we are lumbered with the
aggregate update problem:
  * manipulating large datastructures by copying is too expensive
  * performing I/O with copying is impossible
* The conclusion is that
* We cannot allow arbitrary pure programs to do I/O
* Any large aggregate updates will be very expensive
* Why use the word “arbitrary” above ?

## Single Threadedness

The use of a data value ds is “single-threaded”1
if
  * There is only ever one live reference to it.
  * Once a function has been applied to it (f ds),the program no longer refers to ds.
* Non-single threaded examples:
  * f ds = (g ds, h ds) We have two live references to hds once f is evaluated
  * let ds1 = f ds
    ds2 = g ds in ...
    After ds1, we still proceed to refer to ds in the next line
* Single-threaded example:
    let ds1 = f ds
    ds2 = g ds1 in ...


The application of g is to the result of the application of f

### Optimising Single Threadedness
* If a function is applied to a single-threaded argument..
  * destructive update does not destroy referential transparency
* Copying is only necessary to ensure purity if arguments are “multi-threaded”
* So, the destructive update optimisation we saw for
    map inc xs
    is valid if no further reference to xs exists in the program.
* We can implement I/O (destructively) in a pure language if
  * we can ensure all references to files/outside world are single-threaded.

### Enforcing Single Threadedness
There are two ways to enforce single-threadedness.
1. “Invent and Verify”
    * Programmers write program in their own way.
    * Compiler checks for single-threadedness where required.
    * Implemented in language “Clean”
    using the type system (uniqueness types)
    * Undecidable, so valid programs may be rejected
2. “Correctness by Construction”
    * Required single-threadedness enforced by compiler
    * i.e. Special restricted sub-language for I/O
    * Implemented in Haskell
    using abstract IO type and “monads”.
    * Can’t write all possible single-threaded programs
