# Introduction to Monads 
**Functor**: a functor is a way to apply a function over or around some structure we don't want to alter eg fmapping over lists (function gets applied to each value in list and list structure remains). In practice functor represents a type that can be mapped over.

**Applicative functor**: has more structure than a functor

A functor maps a function over some structure; an
applicative maps a function that is contained in some structure over some other structure and then combines the two layers of structure like mappend. So you can think of monads as another way of applying functions over structure, with a couple of additional features.

**Monads** are applicative functors with more structure. They are composable computation descriptions. The essence of monad is thus separation of composition timeline from the composed computation's execution timeline, as well as the ability of computation to implicitly carry extra data, as pertaining to the computation itself, in addition to its one (hence the name) output, that it will produce when run (or queried, or called upon). 


Monads represent something fundamental in computation, the idea of connecting 2 computations by sequencing them. 


Type IO t is an instance of the monad class. Monad can be used for IO but has a much wider utility. Monads in Haskell are represented by a type class.

 <code>

    class Monad m where
    (>>=) :: m a -> (a -> m b) -> m b
    (>>) :: m a -> m b -> m b
    return :: a -> m a
    fail :: String -> m a
 </code>

 Since >> can be defined in terms of >>= we only need to provide instances fore return and >>=.
 The fourth member of the class, fail, is an error handling operation which takes an error message and causes the chain of functions to fail, perhaps by using error to halt the program.

 ## Do is syntactic sugar 

There is a mechanical translation from the do-notation form to the combinator form, which we can summarize:

<code>

    do { a1 ; a2 ; .. ; an }
    --> a1 >> do {a2 ; .. ; an }
    do { x <- a1 ; a2 ; .. ; an }
    -->  a1 >>= \ x -> do {a2 ; .. ; an }
    do a --> a
</code>

Note that above we show the full Haskell syntax for do-notation
with explicit }, ; and }, rather than relying on the offside-rule

**Offside Rules**: Any non-whitespace token to the left of the first such token on the previous line is taken to be the start of a new declaration.

## The Monad Laws
In order to retain the semantics that we want, any implementation of a monad is required to follow these rules:

<code>
(return v >>= f) == f v

f >>= return == f

(x >>= f) >>= g == x >>= (\ a -> f a >>= g)
</code>

These laws are not checked by the compiler.

## Using the maybe monad
**Maybe** is also a monad.

Imagine a function:

<code>

    f dict = case (lookup "foo" dict) of
    Nothing -> Nothing
    Just x -> case (lookup "bar" dict) of
    Nothing -> Nothing
    Just y -> Just (x,y)
</code>

We can clean this up because “Maybe” is a monad!

<code>

    f dict
    = do x <- lookup "foo" dict
    y <- lookup "bar" dict
    return (x,y)
</code>

* We make the Maybe Type constructor an instance of the
    Monad class:
    instance Monad Maybe where
* To return a result we wrap it with Just:
    return x = Just x
* In bind, if a previous function returns Nothing we    simply propagate this:
    Nothing >>= f = Nothing
* If a previous function returned Just something we apply the (monadic) function to it:
    (Just x) >>= f = f x
* If we want to report an error (fail), we produce Nothing:fail s = Nothing
* All of this is in the standard prelude

## Maybe forms a monad?
* It represents the type of computations that may succeed or fail.
* More specifically, it combines actions by trying the first, and applying the second if the first succeeded (produced a Just result).
* Maybe a is the type of short-circuiting computations which can produce an a.
* There are no “side-effects” here — so monads are not just a way to hide those.


# List Monad

<code>
instance Monad [] where

return a = [a]

lst >>= f = concat (map f lst)

fail _ = []
</code>

What does it mean to say that lists form a monad?
It represents the type of computations that may return 0, 1, or more results.
More specifically, it combines actions by applying the operations to all possible values.

Consider following code for normal lists.

<code>
cart xs ys = do x <- xs

y <- ys

return (x, y)
</code>

* In the list monad, x <- xs, where xs is a list means that x will successively take all values in xs.
    mymap f xs = do { x <- xs ; return (f x) }
is the same as the list comprehension:
    mymap’ f xs = [ f x | x <- xs ]
* The cart function is equivalent to
    cart’ xs ys = [ (x,y) | x <- xs, y <- ys ]

## Square Root Example
Only monadic code uses fail and return, monadic use do notation (syntactic sugar to improve look of code that uses monads).

<code>

    root :: (Floating r, Monad m, Ord r, Show r) => r -> m r


    root x
    = if x < 0
        then fail ("negative! "++show x)
        else return $ sqrt x
</code>

Now, we define sum2roots in terms of root

<code>

    sum2roots x y = do rx <- root x
    ry <- root y
    return (rx + ry)
</code>

Monadic as well, as we use the do-notation.

## Either Monad String

<code>

    newtype ES a = ES (Either String a) 


    class Monad m where
    return :: a -> m a
    (>>=) :: m a -> (a -> m b) -> m b
    fail :: String -> m a


    instance Monad ES where
        return (x :: a) = ES (Right (x :: a)) :: ES a
        (ES (Left errstr) :: ES a) >>= _
                        = ES (Left errstr) :: ES b
        (ES (Right (x :: a))) :: ES a >>= (f :: a -> ES b)
                        = f x :: ES b
        fail (errstr :: String) = ES (Left errstr) :: ES a
</code>



Monad is very generic and using only the monad class functions we get highly reusable code.


# Expression Evaluation using Monads

## Monadic Table Lookup
<code>

    type Dict k d = [ (k, d) ]
    mfind :: (Show k, Ord k, Monad m) => Dict k d -> k -> m d
    mfind [] key = fail ( "mfind - Couldn’t find: " ++ show key )
    mfind ((k,v):kds) key
        | key == k = return v
        | otherwise = mfind kds key
</code>

## Monadic Evaluation (eval,1)
<code>

    eval :: Monad m => Dict Id Double -> Expr -> m Double
    eval _ (Val x) = return x
    eval d (Var i) = mfind d i
    eval d (Add x y) = evalOp d (+) x y
    eval d (Mul x y) = evalOp d (*) x y
    eval d (Sub x y) = evalOp d (-) x y
</code>

## Monadic Operator Evaluation
<code>

    evalOp :: Monad m
        => Dict Id Double -> (Double -> Double -> Double )
        -> Expr -> Expr -> m Double


    evalOp d op x y
    = do a <- eval d x
        b <- eval d y
        return (a ‘op‘ b)
</code>

## Monadic Evaluation (eval,2)
<code>

    -- eval :: Monad m => Dict Id Double -> Expr -> m Double
    eval d (Dvd x y)
    = do b <- eval d y
        if b == 0.0
            then fail "divide by zero"
            else do a <- eval d x
                return (a/b)
    eval d (Def x e1 e2)
    = do v <- eval d e1
        eval (define x v d) e2
</code>