# Function Notation 
*From Andrew Butterfield's slides...*

**Guards**

Used to indicate cases in a function. Each guard tested in turn and the first one to match selects an alternative. Can have a guard to be always true as long as it's the last guard.

<code>signum x | x < 0 = -1
| x == 0 = 0
| otherwise = 1</code>

**Lexical Syntax** 

A Haskell script can be viewed as having four levels:
1. A Haskell program is a set of modules, that control
namespaces and software re-use in large programs.
2. A module consists of a collection of declarations, defining
ordinary values, datatypes, type classes, and fixity information.
3. Next are expressions, that denote values and have static types.
4. At the bottom level is the lexical structure, capturing the
concrete representation of programs in text files.

-- end of line comments
{- -} nested comments 

 Six kinds of names in Haskell:
1. Variables, denoting values;
2. (Data-)Constructors, denoting values;
3. Type-variables, denoting types;
4. Type-constructors, denoting ‘type-builders’;
5. Type-classes, denoting groups of ‘similar’ types;
6. Module-names, denoting program modules.
   

* Two constraints (only) on naming:
    * Variables and Type-variables begin with lowercase letters or underscore,
Other names begin with uppercase letters.
    * An identifier cannot denote both a Type-constructor andTy pe-class  in the same scope.
* So the name *Thing* (e.g.) can denote a module,
data-constructor, and either a class or type-constructor in a single scope.

* Some operators are left-associative like + - * / :
  
    a + b + c parses as (a + b) + c
* Some operators are right-associative like : . ^ && ||:
  
    a:b:c:[] parses as a:(b:(c:[]))
* Other operators are non-associative like == /= < <= >= > :
  
    a <= b <= c is illegal,
    but (a <= b) && (b <= c) is ok.
* The minus sign is tricky: e - f parses as “e subtract f”,
  (- f) parses as “ minus f”,
  but e (- f) parses as
  “function e applied to argument minus f”

* Function application is denoted by juxtaposition, and is left associative
    * f x y z parses as ((f x) y) z
* In types, the function arrow is right associative
    Int -> Char -> Bool parses as Int -> (Char -> Bool)

**Sections**

* A “section” is an operator, with possibly one argument
surrounded by parentheses, which can be treated as a prefix function name.
  * (+) is a prefix function adding its arguments
            (e.g. (+) 2 3 = 5)
  * (/) is a prefix function dividing its arguments
            (e.g. (/) 2.0 4.0 = 0.5)
  * (/4.0) is a prefix function dividing its single          argument by 4
            (e.g. (/4.0) 10.0 = 2.5)
  * (10.0/) is a prefix function dividing 10 by its         single argument
            (e.g. (10/) 4.0 = 2.5)
  * (- e) is not a section, use subtract e instead.
            (e.g. (subtract 1) 4 = 3)

**Character Types** 
The characters can be grouped as follows:
* special : ( ) , ; [ ] ‘ { }
* whitechar → newline|vertab|space|tab
* small → a|b| . . . |z|
* large → A|B| . . . |Z
* digit → 0|1| . . . |9
* symbol : ! # % & * + . / < = > ? @ \ ^ | - ~
* the following characters are not explicitly grouped- : " ’

**Lexemes**
* Variable Identifiers (varid) start with lowercase and continue with letters, numbers, underscore and single-quote.
  
<code>x x’ a123 myGUI _HASH very_long_Ident_indeed’’</code>

* Constructor Identifiers (conid) start with uppercase letters and continue with letters, numbers, underscore and single-quote.
  
<code>T Tree Tree’ My_New_Datatype Variant123 </code>

* Variable Operators (varsym) start with any symbol, and
continue with symbols and the colon.

<code> <+> |:| ++ + - ==> == && #!# </code>

* Constructor Operators (consym) start with a colon and
continue with symbols and the colon.

<code>:+: :~ :=== :$%& </code>

Identifiers (varid, conid) are usually prefix, whilst operators
(varsym,consym) are usually infix

**Literals**
* Integers (integer) are sequences of digits
Examples: 0 123
* Floating-Point (float) has the same syntax as found in
mainstream programming languages. 0.0 1.2e3 1.4e-45
* Characters (char) are enclosed in single quotes and can be
escaped using backslash in standard ways.
’a’ ’$’ ’\’’ ’"’ ’\64’ ’\n’
* Strings (string) are enclosed in double quotes and can also be
escaped using backslash in standard ways.
"Hello World" "I ‘like’ you"
"\" is a dbl-quote" "line1\nline2"


**Function Notation** 

g2 x y z = x+y+z

We can define and use functions whose names are either Variable Identifiers (varid) or Variable Operators (varsym)

For varid names, the function definition uses “prefix” notation, where the function name appears before the arguments:

    myfun x y = x+y+y       myfun 57 42

For varsym names, the function definition uses “infix” notation, where the function has exactly two arguments and the name appears inbetween the arguments:

    x +++ y = x+y+y         57 +++ 42

For varid names, with functions having two1 arguments, we can define and use them “infix-style” by surrounding them with backticks:

    x ‘plus2‘ y = x+y+y     57 ‘plus2‘ 42

For varsym names, we can define and use them “prefix-style” by enclosing them in parentheses:

    (++++) x y = x+y+y (++++) 57 42

We can define one way and use the other—all these are valid:

    57 ‘myfun‘          42 (+++) 57 42
    plus2 57 42         57 ++++ 42